---
title: "QUIC-LB: Generating Routable QUIC Connection IDs"
abbrev: QUIC-LB
docname: draft-duke-quic-load-balancers-latest
date: {DATE}
category: std
ipr: trust200902
area: Transport
workgroup: QUIC

stand_alone: yes
pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs, docmapping]

author:
  -
    ins: M. Duke
    name: Martin Duke
    org: F5 Networks, Inc.
    email: martin.h.duke@gmail.com

  -
    ins: N. Banks
    name: Nick Banks
    org: Microsoft
    email: nibanks@microsoft.com

normative:

  QUIC-TRANSPORT:
    title: "QUIC: A UDP-Based Multiplexed and Secure Transport"
    date: {DATE}
    seriesinfo:
      Internet-Draft: draft-ietf-quic-transport
    author:
      -
        ins: J. Iyengar
        name: Jana Iyengar
        org: Fastly
        role: editor
      -
        ins: M. Thomson
        name: Martin Thomson
        org: Mozilla
        role: editor

--- abstract

QUIC connection IDs allow continuation of connections across address/port
4-tuple changes, and can store routing information for stateless or low-state
load balancers.  They also can prevent linkability of connections across
deliberate address migration through the use of protected communications between
client and server.  This creates issues for load-balancing intermediaries.  This
specification standardizes methods for encoding routing information and proposes
an optional protocol called QUIC-LB to exchange the parameters of that encoding.
This framework also enables offload of other QUIC functions to trusted
intermediaries, given the explicit cooperation of the QUIC server.

--- middle

# Introduction

QUIC packets usually contain a connection ID to allow endpoints to associate
packets with different address/port 4-tuples to the same connection context.
This feature makes connections robust in the event of NAT rebinding.  QUIC
endpoints designate the connection ID which peers use to address packets.
Server-generated connection IDs create a potential need for out-of-band
communication to support QUIC. All QUIC packet headers have a Destination
Connection ID (DCID) field, which generally contains an ID generated by the
destination.

QUIC allows servers (or load balancers) to designate an initial connection ID to
encode useful routing information for load balancers.  It also encourages
servers, in packets protected by cryptography, to provide additional connection
IDs to the client.  This allows clients that know they are going to change IP
address or port to use a separate connection ID on the new path, thus reducing
linkability as clients move through the world.

There is a tension between the requirements to provide routing information and
mitigate linkability.  Ultimately, because new connection IDs are in protected
packets, they must be generated at the server if the load balancer does not have
access to the connection keys. However, it is the load balancer that has the
context necessary to generate a connection ID that encodes useful routing
information. In the absence of any shared state between load balancer and
server, the load balancer must maintain a relatively expensive table of
server-generated connection IDs, and will not route packets correctly if they
use a connection ID that was originally communicated in a protected
NEW_CONNECTION_ID frame.

This specification provides a method of coordination between QUIC servers and
low-state load balancers to support connection IDs that encode routing
information.  It describes desirable properties of a solution, and then
specifies a protocol that provides those properties. This protocol supports
multiple encoding schemes that increase in complexity as they address paths
between load balancer and server with weaker trust dynamics.

Aside from load balancing, adding structure to the Connection ID can enable
other network functions from trusted intermediaries. These intermediaries might
include hardware assist on the server host itself, that does not have access to
fully decrypted QUIC packets. Though not directly relevant to load balancing,
QUIC-LB includes optional extensions to structure the connection ID for these
other purposes. In particular, this document specifies a means of offloading
stateless retry to counter Denial of Service attacks. It also proposes a system
for self-encoding connection ID length in all packets, so that crypto offload
can consistently look up key information.

## Terminology

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD",
"SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be
interpreted as described in RFC 2119 {{?RFC2119}}.

In this document, these words will appear with that interpretation only when in
ALL CAPS.  Lower case uses of these words are not to be interpreted as carrying
significance described in RFC 2119.

In this document, "client" and "server" refer to the endpoints of a QUIC
connection unless otherwise indicated.  A "load balancer" is an intermediary for
that connection that does not possess QUIC connection keys, but it may rewrite
IP addresses or conduct other IP or UDP processing.

Note that stateful load balancers that act as proxies, by terminating a QUIC
connection with the client and then retrieving data from the server using QUIC
or another protocol, are treated as a server with respect to this specification.

When discussing security threats to QUIC-LB, we distinguish between
"inside observers" and "outside observers." The former lie on the path between
the load balancer and server, which often but not always lies inside the
server's data center or cloud deployment. Outside observers are on the path
between the load balancer and client. "Off-path" attackers, though not on any
data path, may also be "inside" or "outside" depending on whether not they have
network access to the server without intermediation by the load balancer and/or
other security devices.

# Protocol Objectives

## Simplicity

QUIC is intended to provide unlinkability across connection migration, but
servers are not required to provide additional connection IDs that effectively
prevent linkability.  If the coordination scheme is too difficult to implement,
servers behind load balancers using connection IDs for routing will use
trivially linkable connection IDs. Clients will therefore be forced choose
between terminating the connection during migration or remaining linkable,
subverting a design objective of QUIC.

The solution should be both simple to implement and require little additional
infrastructure for cryptographic keys, etc.

## Security

In the limit where there are very few connections to a pool of servers, no
scheme can prevent the linking of two connection IDs with high probability.  In
the opposite limit, where all servers have many connections that start and end
frequently, it will be difficult to associate two connection IDs even if they
are known to map to the same server.

QUIC-LB is relevant in the region between these extremes: when the information
that two connection IDs map to the same server is helpful to linking two
connection IDs. Obviously, any scheme that transparently communicates this
mapping to outside observers compromises QUIC's defenses against linkability.

However, concealing this mapping from inside observers is beyond the scope of
QUIC-LB.  By simply observing Link-Layer and/or Network-Layer addresses of
packets containing distinct connection IDs, it is trivial to determine that they
map to the same server, even if connection IDs are entirely random and do not
encode routing information.  Schemes that conceal these addresses (e.g., IPsec)
can also conceal QUIC-LB messages.

Inside observers are generally able to mount Denial of Service (DoS) attacks on
QUIC connections regardless of Connection ID schemes.  However, QUIC-LB should
protect against Denial of Service due to inside off-path attackers in cases
where such attackers are possible.

Though not an explicit goal of the QUIC-LB design, concealing the server mapping
also complicates attempts to focus attacks on a specific server in the pool.

## Robustness to Middleboxes

The path between load balancer and server may pass through middleboxes that
could drop the coordination messages in this protocol.  It is therefore
advantageous to make messages resemble QUIC traffic as much as possible, as any
viable path must obviously admit QUIC traffic.

## Load Balancer Chains

While it is possible to construct a scheme that supports multiple low-state load
balancers in the path, by using different parts of the connection ID to encode
routing information for each load balancer, this use case is out of scope for
QUIC-LB.

# First CID octet

The first octet of a Connection ID is reserved for two special purposes, one
mandatory (config rotation) and one optional (length self-description).

Subsequent sections of this document refer to the contents of this octet as the
"first octet."

## Config Rotation {#config-rotation}

The first two bits of any connection-ID MUST encode the configuration phase of
that ID.  QUIC-LB messages indicate the phase of the algorithm and parameters
that they encode.

A new configuration may change one or more parameters of the old configuration,
or change the algorithm used.

It is possible for servers to have mutually exclusive sets of supported
algorithms, or for a transition from one algorithm to another to result in Fail
Payloads.  The four states encoded in these two bits allow two mutually
exclusive server pools to coexist, and for each of them to transition to a new
set of parameters.

When new configuration is distributed to servers, there will be a transition
period when connection IDs reflecting old and new configuration coexist in the
network.  The rotation bits allow load balancers to apply the correct routing
algorithm and parameters to incoming packets.

Servers MUST NOT generate new connection IDs using an old configuration when it
has sent an Ack payload for a new configuration.

Load balancers SHOULD NOT use a codepoint to represent a new configuration until
it takes precautions to make sure that all connections using IDs with an old
configuration at that codepoint have closed or transitioned.  They MAY drop
connection IDs with the old configuration after a reasonable interval to
accelerate this process.

## Configuration Failover

If a server is configured to expect QUIC-LB messages, and it has not received
these, it MUST generate connection IDs with the config rotation bits set to
'11' and MUST use the "disable_migration" transport parameter in all new QUIC
connections. It MUST NOT send NEW_CONNECTION_ID frames with new values.

A load balancer that sees a connection ID with config rotation bits set to
'11' MUST revert to 5-tuple routing.

## Length Self-Description

Local hardware cryptographic offload devices may accelerate QUIC servers by
receiving keys from the QUIC implementation indexed to the connection ID.
However, on physical devices operating multiple QUIC servers, it is impractical,
as a practical matter, to efficiently lookup these keys if the connection ID
does not self-encode its own length.

Note that this is a function of particular server devices and is irrelevant to
load balancers. As such, it is not negotiated between servers and load
balancers. However, the remaining 6 bits in the first octet of the Connection ID
are reserved to express the length of the following connection ID, not
including the first octet.

A server not using this functionality SHOULD make the six bits appear to be
random.

# Routing Algorithms

In QUIC-LB, load balancers do not send individual connection IDs to servers.
Instead, they communicate the parameters of an algorithm to generate routable
connection IDs.

The algorithms differ in the complexity of configuration at both load balancer
and server. Increasing complexity improves obfuscation of the server mapping.

The load balancer MUST use routing logic that can handle DCIDs in QUIC long
headers with a length shorter than expected by its algorithm. In QUIC version 1,
both Initial and 0RTT packets have DCIDs chosen by the client. It SHOULD
consistently route packets with a given DCID to the same server, so that
the 0RTT packets arrive at a server with the necessary context. Aside from the
constraints above, the load balancer may use any such algorithm without server
coordination.

The load balancer MUST NOT make the routing behavior dependent on any bits in
the first octet of the QUIC packet header, except the first bit, which indicates
a long header. All other bits are QUIC version-dependent and intermediaries
should not build their design on version-specific templates.

There are situations where a server pool might be operating two or more routing
algorithms or parameter sets simultaneously.  The load balancer uses the first
two bits of the connection ID to multiplex incoming DCIDs over these schemes.

## Plaintext CID Algorithm {#plaintext-cid-algorithm}

The Plaintext CID Algorithm makes no attempt to obscure the mapping of
connections to servers, significantly increasing linkability. The format is
depicted in the figure below.

~~~~~
0                   1                   2                   3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|  First octet  |             Server ID (X=8..152)              |      
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                        Any (0..152-X)                         |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~
{: #plaintext-cid-format title="Plaintext CID Format"}

### Load Balancer Actions

The load balancer selects a number of bytes of the server connection ID
(SCID) that it will use to route to a given server, called the "routing bytes".
The number of bytes MUST have enough entropy to have a different code point for
each server.

The load balancer shares this value with servers, as explained in
{{protocol-description}}, along with the value that represents that server.

On each incoming packet, the load balancer extracts consecutive octets,
beginning with the second byte. These bytes represent the server ID.

### Server Actions

The server chooses a connection ID length.  This MUST be at least one byte
longer than the routing bytes.

When a server needs a new connection ID, it encodes its assigned server ID
in consecutive octets beginning with the second. All other bits in the
connection ID, except for the first octet, MAY be set to any other value. These
other bits SHOULD appear random to observers.

## Obfuscated CID Algorithm {#obfuscated-cid-algorithm}

The Obfuscated CID Algorithm makes an attempt to obscure the mapping of
connections to servers to reduce linkability, while not requiring true
encryption and decryption. The format is depicted in the figure below.

~~~~~
0                   1                   2                   3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|  First octet  |  Mixed routing and non-routing bits (64..152) |      
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~
{: #obfuscated-cid-format title="Obfuscated CID Format"}

### Load Balancer Actions

The load balancer selects an arbitrary set of bits of the server connection ID
(SCID) that it will use to route to a given server, called the "routing bits".
The number of bits MUST have enough entropy to have a different code point for
each server, and SHOULD have enough entropy so that there are many codepoints
for each server.

The load balancer MUST NOT select a routing mask with more than 136 routing
bits set to 1, which allows for the first octet and up to 2 octets for server
purposes in a maximum-length connection ID.

The load balancer selects a divisor that MUST be larger than the number of
servers.  It SHOULD be large enough to accommodate reasonable increases in the
number of servers. The divisor MUST be an odd integer so certain addition
operations do not always produce an even number.

The load balancer also assigns each server a "modulus", an integer between 0 and
the divisor minus 1. These MUST be unique for each server, and SHOULD be
distributed across the entire number space between zero and the divisor.

The load balancer shares these three values with servers, as explained in
{{protocol-description}}.

Upon receipt of a QUIC packet that is not of type Initial or 0-RTT, the load
balancer extracts the selected bits of the SCID and expresses them as an
unsigned integer of that length.  The load balancer then divides the result by
the chosen divisor. The modulus of this operation maps to the modulus for the
destination server.

Note that any SCID that contains a server's modulus, plus an arbitrary integer
multiple of the divisor, in the routing bits is routable to that server
regardless of the contents of the non-routing bits. Outside observers that do
not know the divisor or the routing bits will therefore have difficulty
identifying that two SCIDs route to the same server.

Note also that not all Connection IDs are necessarily routable, as the computed
modulus may not match one assigned to any server.  Load balancers SHOULD drop
these packets if not a QUIC Initial or 0-RTT packet.

### Server Actions

The server chooses a connection ID length.  This MUST contain all of the routing
bits and MUST be at least 9 octets to provide adequate entropy.

When a server needs a new connection ID, it adds an arbitrary nonnegative
integer multiple of the divisor to its modulus, without exceeding the maximum
integer value implied by the number of routing bits. The choice of multiple
should appear random within these constraints.

The server encodes the result in the routing bits. It MAY put any other value
into bits that used neither for routing nor config rotation.  These bits
SHOULD appear random to observers.

## Stream Cipher CID Algorithm

The Stream Cipher CID algorithm provides true cryptographic protection, rather
than mere obfuscation, at the cost of additional per-packet processing at the
load balancer to decrypt every incoming connection ID except for those in
Initial and 0RTT packets. The CID format is depicted below.

~~~~~
0                   1                   2                   3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|  First Octet  |            Nonce (X=64..144)                  |      
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                 Encrypted Server ID (Y=8..152-X)              |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                   For server use (0..152-X-Y)                 |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~
{: #stream-cipher-cid-format title="Stream Cipher CID Format"}

### Load Balancer Actions

The load balancer assigns a server ID to every server in its pool, and
determines a server ID length (in octets) sufficiently large to encode all
server IDs, including potential future servers.

The load balancer also selects a nonce length and an 16-octet AES-ECB key to use
for connection ID decryption.  The nonce length MUST be at least 8 octets and no
more than 16 octets. The nonce length and server ID length MUST sum to 19 or
fewer octets.

The load balancer shares these three values with servers, as explained in
{{protocol-description}}.

Upon receipt of a QUIC packet that is not of type Initial or 0-RTT, the load
balancer extracts as many of the earliest octets from the destination connection
ID as necessary to match the nonce length. The server ID immediately follows.

The load balancer decrypts the server ID using 128-bit AES Electronic Codebook
(ECB) mode, much like QUIC header protection. The nonce octets are zero-padded
to 16 octets.  AES-ECB encrypts this nonce using its key to generate a mask
which it applies to the encrypted server id.

server_id = encrypted_server_id ^ AES-ECB(key, padded-nonce)

For example, if the nonce length is 10 octets and the server ID length is 2
octets, the connection ID can be as small as 13 octets.  The load balancer uses
the the second through eleventh of the connection ID for the nonce, pads it to 16
octets using the first 6 octets of the token, and uses this to decrypt the server ID
in the twelfth and thirteenth octet.

The output of the decryption is the server ID that the load balancer uses for
routing.

### Server Actions

When generating a routable connection ID, the server writes arbitrary bits into
its nonce octets, and its provided server ID into the server ID octets. Servers
MAY opt to have a longer connection ID beyond the nonce and server ID. The nonce
and additional bits MAY encode additional information, but SHOULD appear
essentially random to observers.

The server decrypts the server ID using 128-bit AES Electronic Codebook (ECB)
mode, much like QUIC header protection. The nonce octets are padded to 16 octets
using the as many of the first octets of the token as necessary. AES-ECB encrypts
this nonce using its key to generate a mask which it applies to the server id.

encrypted_server_id = server_id ^ AES-ECB(key, padded-nonce)

## Block Cipher CID Algorithm

The Block Cipher CID Algorithm, by using a full 16 octets of plaintext and a
128-bit cipher, provides higher cryptographic protection and detection of
spurious connection IDs. However, it also requires connection IDs of at least
17 octets, increasing overhead of client-to-server packets.

~~~~~
0                   1                   2                   3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|  First octet  |       Encrypted server ID (X=8..144)          |      
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|             Encrypted Zero Padding (Y=0..144-X)               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
            Encrypted bits for server use (144-X-Y)             |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|           Unencrypted bits for server use (0..24)             |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~
{: #block-cipher-cid-format title="Block Cipher CID Format"}

### Load Balancer Actions

The load balancer assigns a server ID to every server in its pool, and
determines a server ID length (in octets) sufficiently large to encode all
server IDs, including potential future servers.  The server ID will start in the
second octet of the decrypted connection ID and occupy continuous octets beyond
that.

The load balancer selects a zero-padding length. This SHOULD be at least four
octets to allow detection of spurious connection IDs. The server ID and zero-
padding length MUST sum to no more than 16 octets. They SHOULD sum to no more
than 12 octets, to provide servers adequate space to encode their own opaque
data.

The load balancer also selects an 16-octet AES-ECB key to use for connection ID
decryption.

The load balancer shares these four values with servers, as explained in
{{protocol-description}}.

Upon receipt of a QUIC packet that is not of type Initial or 0-RTT, the load
balancer reads the first octet to obtain the config rotation bits. It then
decrypts the subsequent 16 octets using AES-ECB decryption and the chosen key.

The decrypted plaintext contains the server id, zero padding, and opaque server
data in that order. If the zero padding octets are not zero, the load balancer
MUST drop the packet. The load balancer uses the server ID octets for routing.

### Server Actions

When generating a routable connection ID, the server MUST choose a connection ID
length between 17 and 20 octets. The server writes its provided server ID into
the server ID octets, zeroes into the zero-padding octets, and arbitrary bits
into the remaining bits. These arbitrary bits MAY encode additional information.
Bits in the first, eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth octets SHOULD appear
essentially random to observers. The first two bits of the first octet are
reserved for config rotation {{config-rotation}}.

The server then encrypts the second through seventeenth octets using the 128-bit
AES-ECB cipher.

# Retry Service {#retry-offload}

When a server is under load, QUICv1 allows it to defer storage of connection
state until the client proves it can receive packets at its advertised IP
address.  Through the use of a Retry packet, a token in subsequent client
Initial packets, and the original_connection_id transport parameter, servers
verify address ownership and clients verify that there is no "man in the middle"
generating Retry packets.

As a trusted Retry Service is literally a "man in the middle," the service must
communicate the original_connection_id back to the server so that in can pass
client verification. It also must either verify the address itself (with the
server trusting this verification) or make sure there is common context for the
server to verify the address using a service-generated token.

There are two different mechanisms to allow offload of DoS mitigation to a
trusted network service. One requires no shared state; the server need only be
configured to trust a retry service, though this imposes other operational
constraints. The other requires shared key, but has no such constraints.

Retry services MUST forward all non-Initial QUIC packets, as well as Initial
packets from the server.

## Common Requirements

Regardless of mechanism, a retry service has an active mode, where it is
generating Retry packets, and an inactive mode, where it is not, based on its
assessment of server load and the likelihood an attack is underway. The choice
of mode MAY be made on a per-packet basis, through a stochastic process or based
on client address.

A retry service MUST forward all packets for a QUIC version it does not
understand. Note that if servers support versions the retry service does not,
this may unacceptably increase loads on the servers. However, dropping these
packets would introduce chokepoints to block deployment of new QUIC versions.
Note that future versions of QUIC might not have Retry packets, or require
different information.

## No-Shared-State Retry Service

The no-shared-state retry service requires no coordination, except that the
server must be configured to accept this service. The scheme uses the first bit
of the token to distinguish between tokens from Retry packets (codepoint '0')
and tokens from NEW_TOKEN frames (codepoint '1').

### Service Requirements {#nss-service-requirements}

A no-shared-state retry service MUST be present on all paths from potential
clients to the server. These paths MUST fail to pass QUIC traffic should the
service fail for any reason. That is, if the service is not operational, the
server MUST NOT be exposed to client traffic. Otherwise, servers that have
already disabled their Retry capability would be vulnerable to attack.

The path between service and server MUST be free of any potential attackers. Note
that this and other requirements above severely restrict the operational
conditions in which a no-shared-state retry service can safely operate.

Retry tokens generated by the service MUST have the format below.

~~~~~
0                   1                   2                   3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|0| ODCIL (7) |  Original Destination Connection ID (0..160)    |      
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|           Original Destination Connection ID (...)            |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                     Opaque Data (variable)                    |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~
{: #nss-retry-service-token-format title="Format of non-shared-state retry service tokens"}

The first bit of retry tokens generated by the service must be zero. The token
has the following additional fields:

ODCIL: The length of the original destination connection ID from the triggering
Initial packet. This is in cleartext to be readable for the server, but
authenticated later in the token.

Original Destination Connection ID: This also in cleartext and authenticated
later.

Opaque Data: This data MUST contain encrypted information that allows the retry
service to validate the client's IP address, in accordance with the QUIC
specification. It MUST also encode a secure hash of the original destination
connection ID field to verify that this field has not been edited.

Upon receipt of an Initial packet with a token that begins with '0', the retry
service MUST validate the token in accordance with the QUIC specification. It
must also verify that the secure hash of the Connect ID is correct. If
incorrect, the token is invalid.

In active mode, the service MUST issue Retry packets for all Client initial
packets that contain no token, or a token that has the first bit set to '1'. It
MUST NOT forward the packet to the server. The service MUST validate all tokens
with the first bit set to '0'. If successful, the service MUST forward the
packet with the token intact. If unsuccessful, it MUST drop the packet.

Note that this scheme has a performance drawback. When the retry service is in
active mode, clients with a token from a NEW_TOKEN frame will suffer a 1-RTT
penalty even though it has proof of address with its token.

In inactive mode, the service MUST forward all packets that have no token or a
token with the first bit set to '1'. It MUST validate all tokens with the first
bit set to '0'. If successful, the service MUST forward the packet with the
token intact. If unsuccessful, it MUST either drop the packet or forward it
with the token removed. The latter requires decryption and re-encryption of the
entire Initial packet to avoid authentication failure. Forwarding the packet
causes the server to respond without the original_connection_id transport
parameter, which preserves the normal QUIC signal to the client that there is
an unauthorized man in the middle.

### Server Requirements

A server behind a non-shared-state retry service MUST NOT send Retry packets.

Tokens sent in NEW_TOKEN frames MUST have the first bit be set to '1'.

If a server receives an Initial Packet with the first bit set to '1', it could
be from a server-generated NEW_TOKEN frame and should be processed in accordance
with the QUIC specification. If a server receives an Initial Packet with the
first bit to '0', it is a Retry token and the server MUST NOT attempt to
validate it. Instead, it MUST assume the address is validated and MUST extract
the Original Destination Connection ID, assuming the format described in
{{nss-service-requirements}}.

## Shared-State Retry Service

A shared-state retry service uses a shared key, so that the server can decode
the service's retry tokens. It does not require that all traffic pass through
the Retry service, so servers MAY send Retry packets in response to Initial
packets that don't include a valid token.

Both server and service must have access to Universal time, though tight
synchronization is not necessary.

All tokens, generated by either the server or retry service, MUST use the
following format. This format is the cleartext version. On the wire, these
fields are encrypted using an AES-ECB cipher and the token key. If the token is
not a multiple of 16 octets, the last block is padded with zeroes.

~~~~~
0                   1                   2                   3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|    ODCIL    |   Original Destination Connection ID (0..160)   |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                             ...                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                                                               |      
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+                      Client IP Address (128)                  +
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                         date-time (160)                       |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                      Opaque Data (optional)                   |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~
{: #ss-retry-token-format title="Cleartext format of shared-state retry tokens"}

The tokens have the following fields:

ODCIL: The original destination connection ID length. Tokens in NEW_TOKEN frames
SHOULD set this field to zero.

Original Destination Connection ID: This is copied from the field in the client
Initial packet.

Client IP Address: The source IP address from the triggering Initial packet. The
client IP address is 16 octets. If an IPv4 address, the last 12 octets are
zeroes.

date-time: The date-time string is a total of 20 octets and encodes the time the
token was generated. The format of date-time is described in Section 5.6 of
{{!RFC3339}}. This ASCII field MUST use the "Z" character for time-offset.

Opaque Data: The server may use this field to encode additional information,
such as congestion window, RTT, or MTU. Opaque data SHOULD also allow servers
to distinguish between retry tokens (which trigger use of the
original_connection_id transport parameter) and NEW_TOKEN frame tokens.

### Service Requirements

The service MUST share a "token key" with all supported servers.

When in active mode, the service MUST generate Retry tokens with the format
described above when it receives a client Initial packet with no token.

In active mode, the service SHOULD decrypt incoming tokens. The service SHOULD
drop packets with an IP address that does not match, and SHOULD forward packets
that do, regardless of the other fields.

In inactive mode, the service SHOULD forward all packets to the server so that
the server can issue an up-to-date token to the client.

### Server Requirements

The server MUST validate all tokens that arrive in Initial packets, as they
may have bypassed the Retry service. It SHOULD use the date-time field to apply
its expiration limits for tokens. This need not be synchronized with the retry
service. However, servers MAY allow retry tokens marked as being a few seconds
in the future, due to possible clock synchronization issues.

A server MUST NOT send a Retry packet in response to an Initial packet that
contains a retry token.

# Protocol Description {#protocol-description}

The fundamental protocol requirement is to share the choice of routing
algorithm, and the relevant parameters for that algorithm, between load balancer
and server.

For Plaintext CID Routing, this consists of the Server ID and the routing bytes.
The Server ID is unique to each server, an the routing bytes are global.

For Obfuscated CID Routing, this consists of the Routing Bits, Divisor, and
Modulus. The Modulus is unique to each server, but the others MUST be global.

For Stream Cipher CID Routing, this consists of the Server ID, Server ID Length,
Key, and Nonce Length.  The Server ID is unique to each server, but the others
MUST be global. The authentication token MUST be distributed out of band for
this algorithm to operate.

For Block Cipher CID Routing, this consists of the Server ID, Server ID Length,
Key, and Zero-Padding Length. The Server ID is unique to each server, but the
others MUST be global.

Each routing configuration also requires a unique two-bit config rotation
codepoint (see {{config-rotation}}) to identify it.

## Out of band sharing

When there are concerns about the integrity of the path between load balancer
and server, operators MAY share routing information using an out-of-band
technique, which is out of the scope of this specification.

To simplify configuration, the global parameters can be shared out-of-band,
while the load balancer sends the unique server IDs via the truncated message
formats presented below.

## QUIC-LB Message Exchange

QUIC-LB load balancers and servers exchange messages via the QUIC-LBv1 protocol,
which uses the QUIC invariants with version number 0xF1000000. The QUIC-LB
load balancers send the encoding parameters to servers and periodically
retransmit until that server responds with an acknowledgement. Specifics of this
retransmission are implementation-dependent.

## QUIC-LB Packet {#quic-lb-packet}

A QUIC-LB packet uses a long header.  It carries configuration information from
the load balancer and acknowledgements from the servers.  They are sent when a
load balancer boots up, detects a new server in the pool or needs to update the
server configuration.

~~~~~
0                   1                   2                   3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|1|C R| Reserved|
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                        Version (32)                           |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|  0x00 | 0x00  |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                                                               |
+                  Authentication Token (64)                    +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
| Message Type  |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~
{: #quic-lb-packet-format title="QUIC-LB Packet Format"}

The Version field allows QUIC-LB to use the Version Negotiation mechanism.  All
messages in this specification are specific to QUIC-LBv1.  It should be set to
0xF1000000.

Load balancers MUST cease sending QUIC-LB packets of this version to a server
when that server sends a Version Negotiation packet that does not advertise the
version.

The length of the DCIL and SCIL fields are 0x00.

CR

: The 2-bit CR field indicates the Config Rotation described in
  {{config-rotation}}.

Authentication Token

: The Authentication Token is an 8-byte field that both entities obtain at
  configuration time. It is used to verify that the sender is not an inside
  off-path attacker. Servers and load balancers SHOULD silently discard QUIC-LB
  packets with an incorrect token.

Message Type

: The Message Type indicates the type of message payload that follows the
  QUIC-LB header.

## Message Types and Formats

As described in {{quic-lb-packet}}, QUIC-LB packets contain a single message.
This section describes the format and semantics of the QUIC-LB message types.

### ACK_LB Message {#message-ack-lb}

A server uses the ACK_LB message (type=0x00) to acknowledge a QUIC-LB packet
received from the load balancer.  The ACK-LB message has no additional payload
beyond the QUIC-LB packet header.

Load balancers SHOULD continue to retransmit a QUIC-LB packet until a valid
ACK_LB message, FAIL message or Version Negotiation Packet is received from the
server.

### FAIL Message {#message-fail}

A server uses the FAIL message (type=0x01) to indicate the configuration
received from the load balancer is unsupported.

~~~~~
0                   1                   2                   3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|   Supp. Type  |  Supp. Type   |  ...
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-++-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-++-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~

Servers MUST send a FAIL message upon receipt of a message type which they do
not support, or if they do not possess all of the implied out-of-band
configuration to support a particular message type.

The payload of the FAIL message consists of a list of all the message types
supported by the server.

Upon receipt of a FAIL message, Load Balancers MUST either send a QUIC-LB
message the server supports or remove the server from the server pool.

### ROUTING_INFO Message {#message-routing-info}

A load balancer uses the ROUTING_INFO message (type=0x02) to exchange all the
parameters for the Obfuscated CID algorithm.

~~~~~
0                   1                   2                   3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+                       Routing Bit Mask (152)                  +
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+                               +-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                               |         Modulus (16)          |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|         Divisor (16)          |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~

Routing Bit Mask

: The Routing Bit Mask encodes a '1' at every bit position in the server
 connection ID that will encode routing information.

These bits, along with the Modulus and Divisor,  are chosen by the load balancer
as described in {{obfuscated-cid-algorithm}}.

### STREAM_CID Message {#message-stream-cid}

A load balancer uses the STREAM_CID message (type=0x03) to exchange all the
parameters for using Stream Cipher CIDs.

~~~~~
0                   1                   2                   3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
| Nonce Len (8) |    SIDL (8)   |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                       Server ID (variable)                    |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                                                               |
+                             Key (128)                         +
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~
{: #Stream-cid-format title="Stream CID Payload"}

Nonce Len

: The Nonce Len field is a one-octet unsigned integer that describes the
  nonce length necessary to use this routing algorithm, in octets.

SIDL

: The SIDL field is a one-octet unsigned integer that describes the server ID
  length necessary to use this routing algorithm, in octets.

Server ID

: The Server ID is the unique value assigned to the receiving server. Its
  length is determined by the SIDL field.

Key

: The Key is an 16-octet field that contains the key that the load balancer
  will use to decrypt server IDs on QUIC packets.  See
  {{security-considerations}} to understand why sending keys in plaintext may
  be a safe strategy.

### BLOCK_CID Message {#message-block-cid}

A load balancer uses the BLOCK_CID message (type=0x04) to exchange all the
parameters for using Stream Cipher CIDs.

~~~~~
0                   1                   2                   3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|   ZP Len (8)  |    SIDL (8)   |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                       Server ID (variable)                    |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                                                               |
+                             Key (128)                         +
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~
{: #block-cid-format title="Block CID Payload"}

ZP Len

: The ZP Len field is a one-octet unsigned integer that describes the
  zero-padding length necessary to use this routing algorithm, in octets.

SIDL

: The SIDL field is a one-octet unsigned integer that describes the server ID
  length necessary to use this routing algorithm, in octets.

Server ID

: The Server ID is the unique value assigned to the receiving server. Its
  length is determined by the SIDL field.

Key

: The Key is an 16-octet field that contains the key that the load balancer
  will use to decrypt server IDs on QUIC packets.  See
  {{security-considerations}} to understand why sending keys in plaintext may
  be a safe strategy.

### SERVER_ID Message {#message-server-id}

A load balancer uses the SERVER_ID message (type=0x05) to exchange
explicit server IDs.

~~~~~
0                   1                   2                   3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|    SIDL (8)   |       Server ID (variable)    |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~

Load balancers send the SERVER_ID message when all global values for Stream or
Block CIDs are sent out-of-band, so that only the server-unique values must be
sent in-band. It also provides all necessary paramters for Plaintext CIDs. The
fields are identical to their counterparts in the {{message-stream-cid}}
payload.

### MODULUS Message {#message-modulus}

A load balancer uses the MODULUS message (type=0x06) to exchange just the
modulus used in the Obfuscated CID algorithm.

~~~~~
0                   1                   2                   3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|           Modulus (16)        |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~

Load balancers send the MODULUS when all global values for Obfuscated CIDs
are sent out-of-band, so that only the server-unique values must be sent
in-band. The Modulus field is identical to its counterpart in the
ROUTING_INFO message.

### PLAINTEXT Message {#message-plaintext}

A load balancer uses the PLAINTEXT message (type=0x07) to exchange all
parameters needed for the Plaintext CID algorithm.

~~~~~
0                   1                   2                   3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|   SIDL (8)  |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                                                               |
+                      Server ID (variable)                     +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~

The SIDL field indicates the length of the server ID field. The
Server ID field indicates the encoding that represents the
destination server.

### RETRY_SERVICE_STATELESS message

A no-shared-state retry service uses this message (type=0x08) to notify the
server of the existence of this service. This message has no fields.

### RETRY_SERVICE_STATEFUL message

A shared-state retry service uses this message (type=0x09) to tell the server
about its existence, and share the key needed to decrypt server-generated retry
tokens.

~~~~~
0                   1                   2                   3
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+                           Key (128)                           +
|                                                               |
+                                                               +
|                                                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
~~~~~


# Configuration Requirements

QUIC-LB strives to minimize the configuration load to enable, as much as
possible, a "plug-and-play" model. However, there are some configuration
requirements based on algorithm and protocol choices above.

There are three levels of configuration that correspond to increasing levels of
concern about the security of the load balancer-server path.

The complete information requirements are described in {{protocol-description}}.
Load balancers MUST have configuration for all parameters of each routing
algorithm they support.

If there is any in-band communication, servers MUST be explicitly configured
with the token of the load balancer they expect to interface with. Endpoints
that use Stream Cipher CIDs MUST have this token regardless of the configuration
method.

Optionally, servers MAY be configured with the global parameters of supported
routing algorithms. This allows load balancers to use Server ID and Modulus
Payloads, limiting the information sent in-band.

Finally, servers MAY be directly configured with their unique server IDs or
modulus, eliminating need for in-band messaging at all.  In this case, servers
and load balancers MUST enable only one routing algorithm, as there is no
explicit message to agree on one or the other.

# Security Considerations {#security-considerations}

QUIC-LB is intended to preserve routability and prevent linkability.  Attacks on
the protocol would compromise at least one of these objectives.

Note that the Plaintext CID algorithm makes no attempt to obscure the server
mapping, and therefore does not address these concerns. It exists to allow
consistent CID encoding for compatibility across a network infrastructure.
Servers that are running the Plaintext CID algorithm SHOULD only use it to
generate new CIDs for the Server Initial Packet and SHOULD NOT send CIDs
in QUIC NEW_CONNECTION_ID frames. Doing so might falsely suggest to the client
that said CIDs were generated in a secure fashion.

A routability attack would inject QUIC-LB messages so that load balancers
incorrectly route QUIC connections.

A linkability attack would find some means of determining that two connection
IDs route to the same server. As described above, there is no scheme that
strictly prevents linkability for all traffic patterns, and therefore efforts to
frustrate any analysis of server ID encoding have diminishing returns.

## Outside attackers

For an outside attacker to break routability, it must inject packets that
correctly guess the 64-bit token, and servers must be reachable from these
outside hosts. Load balancers SHOULD drop QUIC-LB packets that arrive on its
external interface.

Off-path outside attackers cannot observe connection IDs, and will therefore
struggle to link them.

On-path outside attackers might try to link connection IDs to the same QUIC
connection.  The Encrypted CID algorithm provides robust entropy to making any
sort of linkage.  The Obfuscated CID obscures the mapping and prevents trivial
brute-force attacks to determine the routing parameters, but does not provide
robust protection against sophisticated attacks.

## Inside Attackers

As described above, on-path inside attackers are intrinsically able to map two
connection IDs to the same server.  The QUIC-LB algorithms do prevent the
linkage of two connection IDs to the same individual connection if servers make
reasonable selections when generating new IDs for that connection.

On-path inside attackers can break routability for new and migrating connections
by copying the token from QUIC-LB messages.  From this privileged position,
however, there are many other attacks that can break QUIC connections to the
server during the handshake.

Off-path inside attackers cannot observe connection IDs to link them.  To
successfully break routability, they must correctly guess the token.

# IANA Considerations

There are no IANA requirements.

--- back

# Acknowledgments

# Change Log

> **RFC Editor's Note:**  Please remove this section prior to
> publication of a final version of this document.

## Since draft-duke-quic-load-balancers-05
- Editorial changes
- Made load balancer behavior independent of QUIC version
- Got rid of token in stream cipher encoding, because server might not have it

## Since draft-duke-quic-load-balancers-04
- Added standard for retry services

## Since draft-duke-quic-load-balancers-03
- Renamed Plaintext CID algorithm as Obfuscated CID
- Added new Plaintext CID algorithm
- Updated to allow 20B CIDs
- Added self-encoding of CID length

## Since draft-duke-quic-load-balancers-02
- Added Config Rotation
- Added failover mode
- Tweaks to existing CID algorithms
- Added Block Cipher CID algorithm
- Reformatted QUIC-LB packets

## Since draft-duke-quic-load-balancers-01

- Complete rewrite
- Supports multiple security levels
- Lightweight messages

## Since draft-duke-quic-load-balancers-00

- Converted to markdown
- Added variable length connection IDs

